___

The `useReducer` Hook is similar to the `useState` Hook.

It allows for custom state logic.

If you find yourself keeping track of multiple pieces of state that rely on complex logic, `useReducer` may be useful.

___

## Syntax

The useReducer Hook accepts two arguments.

useReducer(<reducer>, <initialState>)

The `reducer` function contains your custom state logic and the `initialState`can be a simple value but generally will contain an object.

The `useReducer` Hook returns the current `state`and a `dispatch`method.

Here is an example of `useReducer` in a counter app:

### Example:[Get your own React.js Server](https://www.w3schools.com/spaces/ "W3Schools Spaces")

    import { useReducer } from "react";
    import ReactDOM from "react-dom/client";
    
    const initialTodos = [
      {
        id: 1,
        title: "Todo 1",
        complete: false,
      },
      {
        id: 2,
        title: "Todo 2",
        complete: false,
      },
    ];
    
    const reducer = (state, action) => {
      switch (action.type) {
        case "COMPLETE":
          return state.map((todo) => {
            if (todo.id === action.id) {
              return { ...todo, complete: !todo.complete };
            } else {
              return todo;
            }
          });
        default:
          return state;
      }
    };
    
    function Todos() {
      const [todos, dispatch] = useReducer(reducer, initialTodos);
    
      const handleComplete = (todo) => {
        dispatch({ type: "COMPLETE", id: todo.id });
      };
    
      return (
        <>
          {todos.map((todo) => (
            <div key={todo.id}>
              <label>
                <input
                  type="checkbox"
                  checked={todo.complete}
                  onChange={() => handleComplete(todo)}
                />
                {todo.title}
              </label>
            </div>
          ))}
        </>
      );
    }
    
    const root = ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('root'));
    root.render(<Todos />);
    

[Run Example »](https://www.w3schools.com/react/showreact.asp?filename=demo2_react_usereducer)

___

This is just the logic to keep track of the todo complete status.

All of the logic to add, delete, and complete a todo could be contained within a single `useReducer` Hook by adding more actions.

___