Here, you will learn about the generic interface in TypeScript.

The generic type can also be used with the interface. The following is a generic interface.

    interface IProcessor<T> 
    { 
        result:T;
        process(a: T, b: T) => T;
    }
    

The above `IProcessor` is a generic interface because we used type variable `<T>`. The `IProcessor` interface includes the generic field `result` and the generic method `process()` that accepts two generic type parameters and returns a generic type.

As you learned, you can use [interface as type](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/typescript/typescript-interface#interface-as-type). In the same way, generic interface can be used as type, as shown below.

    interface KeyPair<T, U> {
        key: T;
        value: U;
    }
    
    let kv1: KeyPair<number, string> = { key:1, value:"Steve" }; // OK
    let kv2: KeyPair<number, number> = { key:1, value:12345 }; // OK
    

As you can see in the above example, by using generic interface as type, we can specify the data type of key and value.

In the same way, as you learned, you can use [interface as function type](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/typescript/typescript-interface#interface-as-function-type). Generic interface can also be used as the function type.

    interface KeyValueProcessor<T, U>
    {
        (key: T, val: U): void;
    };
    
    function processNumKeyPairs(key:number, value:number):void { 
        console.log('processNumKeyPairs: key = ' + key + ', value = ' + value)
    }
    
    function processStringKeyPairs(key: number, value:string):void { 
        console.log('processStringKeyPairs: key = '+ key + ', value = ' + value)
    }
        
    let numKVProcessor: KeyValueProcessor<number, number> = processNumKeyPairs;
    numKVProcessor(1, 12345); //Output: processNumKeyPairs: key = 1, value = 12345 
    
    let strKVProcessor: KeyValueProcessor<number, string> = processStringKeyPairs;
    strKVProcessor(1, "Bill"); //Output: processStringKeyPairs: key = 1, value = Bill 
    

In the above example, generic interface `KeyValueProcessor` includes the generic signature of a method without the method name. This will allow us to use any function with the matching signature. The generic type will be set at the time of creating a variable such as `numKVProcessor` and `strKVProcessor`.

The above example can be re-written as below.

    interface KeyValueProcessor<T, U>
    {
        (key: T, val: U): void;
    };
    
    function processKeyPairs<T, U>(key:T, value:U):void { 
        console.log(`processKeyPairs: key = ${key}, value = ${value}`)
    }
    
    let numKVProcessor: KeyValueProcessor<number, number> = processKeyPairs;
    numKVProcessor(1, 12345); //Output: processKeyPairs: key = 1, value = 12345 
    
    let strKVProcessor: KeyValueProcessor<number, string> = processKeyPairs;
    strKVProcessor(1, "Bill"); //Output: processKeyPairs: key = 1, value = Bill 
    

As you can see, we declared a function type `numKVProcessor` as `let numKVProcessor: KeyValueProcessor<number, number> = processKeyPairs;`. The type number will be used as the underlaying type of generic function`processKeyPairs`. This will remove the need of defining separate functions for different data types.

The generic interface can also be implemented in the class, same as the non-generic interface, as shown below.

    interface IKeyValueProcessor<T, U>
    {
        process(key: T, val: U): void;
    };
    
    class kvProcessor implements IKeyValueProcessor<number, string>
    { 
        process(key:number, val:string):void { 
            console.log(`Key = ${key}, val = ${val}`);
        }
    }
    
    let proc: IKeyValueProcessor<number, string> = new kvProcessor();
    proc.process(1, 'Bill'); //Output: processKeyPairs: key = 1, value = Bill 
    

In the above example, the generic type parameters are being set at the time of implementing an interface e.g `class kvProcessor implements IKeyValueProcessor<number, string>`. This will force us to implement the method `process()` with number and string parameters.

We can also make the class `kvProcessor` as generic. Let's see how to create a generic class.

Want to check how much you know TypeScript?