TypeScript supports generic classes. The generic type parameter is specified in angle brackets after the name of the class. A generic class can have generic fields (member variables) or methods.

    class KeyValuePair<T,U>
    { 
        private key: T;
        private val: U;
    
        setKeyValue(key: T, val: U): void { 
            this.key = key;
            this.val = val;
        }
    
        display():void { 
            console.log(`Key = ${this.key}, val = ${this.val}`);
        }
    }
    
    let kvp1 = new KeyValuePair<number, string>();
    kvp1.setKeyValue(1, "Steve");
    kvp1.display(); //Output: Key = 1, Val = Steve 
    
    let kvp2 = new KayValuePair<string, string>();
    kvp2.SetKeyValue("CEO", "Bill"); 
    kvp2.display(); //Output: Key = CEO, Val = Bill
    

In the above example, we created a generic class named `KeyValuePair` with a type variable in the angle brackets `<T, U>`. The `KeyValuePair` class includes two private generic member variables and a generic function `setKeyValue` that takes two input arguments of type T and U. This allows us to create an object of `KeyValuePair` with any type of key and value.

The generic class can also implement a generic interface. Consider the following example.

    interface IKeyValueProcessor<T, U>
    {
        process(key: T, val: U): void;
    };
    
    class kvProcessor<T, U> implements IKeyValueProcessor<T, U>
    { 
        process(key:T, val:U):void { 
            console.log(`Key = ${key}, val = ${val}`);
        }
    }
    
    let proc: IKeyValueProcessor<number, string> = new kvProcessor();
    proc.process(1, 'Bill'); //Output: key = 1, value = Bill 
    

In the above example, the generic class `kvProcessor` implements the generic interface `IKeyValueProcessor`. It does not specify the type parameters T and U, instead it allows users to set them themselves. Thus, `kvProcessor` class can be used with any type of key and value. A variable is defined as generic interface type with underlying types for T and U. So, you don't need to set the generic types for `kvProcessor`.

Want to check how much you know TypeScript?

___