TypeScript introduced a new type `never`, which indicates the values that will never occur.

The never type is used when you are sure that something is never going to occur. For example, you write a function which will not return to its end point or always throws an exception.

    function throwError(errorMsg: string): never { 
                throw new Error(errorMsg); 
    } 
    
    function keepProcessing(): never { 
                while (true) { 
             console.log('I always does something and never ends.')
         }
    }
    

In the above example, the `throwError()` function throws an error and `keepProcessing()` function is always executing and never reaches an end point because the while loop never ends. Thus, never type is used to indicate the value that will never occur or return from a function.

## Difference between never and void

The void type can have undefined or null as a value where as never cannot have any value.

    let something: void = null;
    let nothing: never = null; // Error: Type 'null' is not assignable to type 'never'
    

In TypeScript, a function that does not return a value, actually returns undefined. Consider the following example.

    function sayHi(): void { 
        console.log('Hi!')
    }
    
    let speech: void = sayHi();
    console.log(speech); // undefined
    

As you can see in the above example, `speech` is undefined, because the `sayHi` function internally returns undefined even if return type is void. If you use never type, `speech:never` will give a compile time error, as void is not assignable to never.

Want to check how much you know TypeScript?