TypeScript introduced a new data type called Tuple. Tuple can contain two values of different data types.

Consider the following example of number, string and tuple type variables.

    var empId: number = 1;
    var empName: string = "Steve";        
    
    // Tuple type variable 
    var employee: [number, string] = [1, "Steve"];
    

In the above example, we have defined a variable `empId` as number type and `empName` as string type with values. Here, we declared and assigned two variables to id and name of an employee. The same thing can be achieved by using a single tuple type variable. `employee` is the tuple type variable with two values of number and string type. Thus, removing the need to declare two different variables.

A tuple type variable can include multiple data types as shown below.

    var employee: [number, string] = [1, "Steve"];
    var person: [number, string, boolean] = [1, "Steve", true];
    
    var user: [number, string, boolean, number, string];// declare tuple variable
    user = [1, "Steve", true, 20, "Admin"];// initialize tuple variable
    

You can declare an array of tuple also.

    var employee: [number, string][];
    employee = [[1, "Steve"], [2, "Bill"], [3, "Jeff"]];
    

TypeScript generates an array in JavaScript for the tuple variable. For example, `var employee: [number, string] = [1, 'Steve']` will be compiled as `var employee = [1, "Steve"]` in JavaScript.

## Accessing Tuple Elements

We can access tuple elements using index, the same way as an array. An index starts from zero.

    var employee: [number, string] = [1, "Steve"];
    employee[0]; // returns 1
    employee[1]; // returns "Steve"
    

## Add Elements into Tuple

You can add new elements to a tuple using the push() method.

    var employee: [number, string] = [1, "Steve"];
    employee.push(2, "Bill"); 
    console.log(employee); //Output: [1, 'Steve', 2, 'Bill']
    

This is allowed because we are adding number and string values to the tuple and they are valid for the `employee` tuple.

Now, let's try to add a boolean value to the tuple.

The above example will throw the following error:

    test.ts(4,15): error TS2345: 
    Argument of type 'true' is not assignable to parameter of type 'number | string'.
    

We get an error saying that adding a boolean value to a tuple of type 'number | string' is not permitted. Hence, a tuple declared as 'number | string' can store only number and string values.

The tuple is like an array. So, we can use [array methods](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/typescript/typescript-array#array-methods) on tuple such as pop(), concat() etc.

    var employee: [number, string] = [1, "Steve"];
    
    // retrieving value by index and performing an operation 
    employee[1] = employee[1].concat(" Jobs"); 
    console.log(employee); //Output: [1, 'Steve Jobs']
    

Want to check how much you know TypeScript?